( blues music playing )
Man:
* I NEVER MEANT
TO HURT YOU *
* NEVER MEANT
TO MAKE YOU CRY *
* NEVER MEANT TO HURT YOU
* NEVER MEANT
TO MAKE YOU CRY *
* NOW I'M LOST
IN THIS HOUSE *
* AND I CAN'T
REMEMBER WHY. *
Ron Levine:
THERE'S ALWAYS
BEEN A FASCINATION
WITH THE DEEP SOUTH
FOR ME,
THIS KIND OF LIKE
LOVE/HATE RELATIONSHIP
WITH THE DEEP SOUTH.
I FEAR IT YET I HAVE
THIS INSANE CURIOSITY
TO GO DOWN THERE
AND PHOTOGRAPH PEOPLE.
WE PHOTOGRAPHED
ALLIGATOR WRESTLERS IN '95
AND THEN I HEARD
THIS RADIO PIECE ON THIS
GERIATRIC PRISON.
FROM THERE
IT JUST KIND OF...
CATAPULTED INTO
THIS EIGHT-YEAR ODYSSEY.
THE FIRST PRISON WE
WENT TO WAS HAMILTON A&I.
THAT STANDS
FOR THE HAMILTON INSTITUTE
FOR THE AGED AND INFIRM.
IT'S REALLY JUST A NURSING HOME
WITH BARBED WIRE
SURROUNDING IT.
LOOSEN UP
A BIT ON THAT.
Levine:
I TAKE PICTURES ABOUT THINGS
I'M CURIOUS ABOUT.
THIS IS WHAT I DO.
I'M FASCINATED BY
THIS LIFESTYLE.
THAT'S GOOD,
THAT'S GOOD.
I'M ALLOWED ENTRANCE
INTO THEIR WORLD BECAUSE
OF THIS CAMERA I'M HOLDING.
THE CAMERA IS
THIS GREAT VISA THAT SAYS,
"HEY, HERE'S YOUR TICKET
TO ENTER THESE PEOPLE'S LIVES.
HERE'S A LIFESTYLE
YOU'VE NEVER SEEN BEFORE.
NO ONE WILL LET YOU INTO.
HERE'S A LIFESTYLE
THAT'S NOT YOUR OWN.
COME ON IN AND VISIT."
AND THAT'S WHAT I'M HOPING
TO PASS ON TO THE PUBLIC
THROUGH THE BOOK,
THROUGH THE EXHIBITION:
HERE'S YOUR VISA
INTO THEIR LIVES
THROUGH MY IMAGES.
Robert Braxton:
I'VE ALWAYS BEEN
A FANATIC FOR WORKING OUT.
YOU'RE
IN AMAZING SHAPE.
Levine:
ROBERT BRAXTON'S 63,
HE LOOKS LIKE HE'S 53.
I MEAN, THE GUY KEEPS HIMSELF
IN GREAT CONDITION.
HE'S THE BIG GUY ON CAMPUS
IN HAMILTON RIGHT NOW.
HE'S 63 BUT NO ONE'S
EVER GOING TO SCREW WITH HIM.
Braxton:
I HAD A CHANCE ONE TIME TO GO
MAYBE PROFESSIONAL BASEBALL,
PITCHING THE BALL,
BUT MY ATTITUDE MESSED ME UP.
- SEE? IT'S 11-7, SO 11-5?
- 11-5, THEN I'LL PUSH IT 1/3.
Braxton:
YOU BE TENSED UP SOMETIME,
STRESSED OUT SOMETIME.
I FIND THAT
WEIGHTS AND WORKING OUT,
THAT BURNS A LOT OF IT.
YOU KNOW?
TAKES A LOT OF TENSION,
FRUSTRATION,
KEEP YOU IN A GOOD MOOD.
WHEN YOU FEEL GOOD PHYSICALLY,
YOU FEEL GOOD MENTALLY,
YOU KNOW?
AND WHEN YOU'RE FEELING GOOD,
YOU'RE ABLE TO DO GOOD.
WHEN YOU'RE MISERABLE
FEELING-- AMEN.
YOU SEE WHERE I'M COMING FROM?
YOU FEEL BAD.
YOU FEEL REAL BAD.
YOU DO BAD THINGS.
( muttering )
GOOD.
NICE!
GOT IT.
63.
Braxton:
MOST OF THESE FOLKS
SHOULD BE AT HOME, I SAY.
BECAUSE THERE'S NOTHING
ELSE THERE. I BELIEVE THEY'VE
BEEN BROKE.  I KNOW I'M BROKE.
I'M QUITE SURE
A LOT OF THEM GUYS IN
THEIR CONDITION, THEY'RE BROKE.
ALL THEY WANT TO DO IS
CATCH ANOTHER FISH AND KISS
THEIR GRANDKIDS, YOU KNOW.
THEY AIN'T GOT THAT
MANY MORE YEARS ON THIS EARTH,
SOME OF THEM GUYS.
AND I CAN LOOK AT IT AND SEE IT.
IT'S A SAD THING.
LATELY, WHEN YOU GET OLD, MAN,
YOU STARTED THINKING ABOUT
A WHOLE LOT OF THINGS.
YOU KNOW
WHERE I'M COMING FROM?
YOU STARTED THINKING ABOUT,
"IS THERE A HEAVEN OR A HELL?"
YOU START THINKING ABOUT THESE
THINGS BECAUSE YOU KNOW YOU'RE
GETTING NEAR THAT TIME.
HEY, WHAT CAN I SAY, MAN?
I JUST BE TRYING,
YOU KNOW WHAT I'M SAYING?
TO DO THE RIGHT THINGS
AND HOPE THAT ONE DAY I'LL BE
ABLE TO GET OUT OF HERE AGAIN,
AND DO THE RIGHT THINGS
BEFORE I LEAVE THIS EARTH,
YOU KNOW?
I SURE HOPE SO.
THERE WE GO.
ONE LIKE THIS-- GOOD.
OKAY, THAT'S ONE.
THAT'S GREAT.  ALL RIGHT,
NOW: ONE, TWO, THREE.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S JUST SEE WHAT THIS LOOKS
LIKE AND THEN WE'LL START.
Levine:
THE YOUNG GUYS IN HAMILTON A&I
ARE THERE BASICALLY
TO TAKE CARE OF THE OLD GUYS.
- THERE'S TEX.
- IS HE STILL HERE?
NO, HE DIED
ABOUT FOUR MONTHS AGO.
Levine:
THE FIRST TIME WE WENT IN,
WE SAID WE MIGHT BE
DOING A BOOK PROJECT.
SO WHEN WE RETURN
TO THE PRISONS NOW
WITH THE BOOK,
WE GET MUCH DIFFERENT
SENTIMENT TOWARDS US,
IN THE SENSE THAT THEY ARE VERY
WILLING TO BE PHOTOGRAPHED,
MOST OF THE MEN NOW.
THEY WANT THEIR PICTURES TAKEN.
THEY WANT THEIR STORIES TOLD.
YOUR EYES RIGHT HERE.
YOUR EYES RIGHT IN THE LENS.
THANKS, GOOD.
Levine:
ONE GUY KILLED HIS WIFE
BECAUSE SHE WAS JEALOUS.
AND WHEN WE ASKED HIM,
"WOULD YOU DO IT AGAIN?"
HE GOES, "DAMN RIGHT
I'D DO IT AGAIN!"
HE HAD NO REMORSE AT ALL,
YOU KNOW?
AND THEN YOU SEE THE OPPOSITE
IN VICTOR HAMILTON,
WHO IS SO REMORSEFUL,
SO SAD,
AND JUST SO PITIABLE
WHEN HE TALKS ABOUT IT,
THAT YOU CAN'T BUT
FEEL EMPATHY FOR HIM.
LIFE SENTENCE,
SO THAT MEANS THERE'S
NO CHANCE OF PAROLE.
THAT'S INSANE.
SO YOU'RE BASICALLY
GOING TO DIE IN PRISON.
- RIGHT.
- WHY DID THEY GIVE YOU
A LIFE SENTENCE?
BECAUSE I WAS A PARAMEDIC.
THAT INCENSED THE JUDGE.
- WHY?
- BECAUSE MY
PROFESSIONAL CALLING
WAS TO SAVE LIVES,
NOT TO TAKE IT.
BUT ALL OF THAT KIND OF
GOES UP IN SMOKE
WHEN YOU'RE USING DRUGS.
THAT'S EXACTLY--
I HAVE A SCAR
ON MY HAND RIGHT HERE
WHERE I INJECTED DRUGS.
I WAS DIVORCED.
I MOVED IN WITH A GIRL
THAT WAS A GO-GO GIRL.
AND WE BECAME KIND
OF SOUL MATES.
I ASKED HER,
PLEASE DON'T BRING
DRUG DEALERS
TO THIS HOUSE.
THIS IS OUR HAVEN--
OUR SAFE HAVEN.
THAT'S WHEN THIS WHOLE
SITUATION STARTED.
IT ESCALATED FROM AN ARGUMENT
TO A SLAP FIGHT TO...
SHE STRUCK ME WITH A HAMMER
AND I TOOK IT AWAY FROM HER.
AND SHE HAD A LITTLE
ASTRA .380 AUTOMATIC PISTOL,
AND THAT'S WHAT--
I WENT OFF THE DEEP END.
I STRUCK HER WITH THE HAMMER,
AND SHE DIED FROM HER INJURIES.
SO I'M TOTALLY
RESPONSIBLE FOR IT.
I'VE MADE MY BED
AND NOW I'M LYING IN IT.
I STILL MISS HER.
- YOUR WHOLE LIFE
IS HERE, YOU KNOW?
- THAT'S THE WHOLE DEAL?
THAT'S EVERYTHING.
THAT'S ALL YOUR TOILETRIES
AND ALL YOUR STORE ITEMS
AND ALL THAT'S PILED INTO
THIS BOX. THAT'S WHAT'S YOU--
LITERALLY, YOU LIVE OUT OF.
BECAUSE OF THE LOW CEILINGS--
YOU CAN TOUCH THE CEILING.
THEY'RE DOUBLE BUNKS
BUT THIS GUY CAN'T SIT UP.
HE HAS TO SIT LIKE THIS.
THERE ARE TWO
THINGS THAT CAN'T HAPPEN.
I CAN'T GET ANY CLOSURE,
BECAUSE SHE'S DEAD.
YOU CAN'T EVER SIT DOWN
FACE TO FACE AND LOOK
IN HER EYES
AND SAY,
"I'M REALLY SORRY FOR THAT.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT PROMPTED IT.
I DON'T ASK YOUR FORGIVENESS,
ALL I WANT YOU TO DO
IS LISTEN TO ME."
YOU CAN'T DO THAT.
THAT OPTION'S GONE.
HOW DO YOU APOLOGIZE
TO SOMEBODY WHOSE LIFE
YOU'VE TAKEN?
WHAT JUSTIFIES IT?
HOW DO YOU RATIONALIZE IT?
YOU CAN'T.
YOU CAN SIT HERE AND GO THROUGH
EVERY WORD IN THE DICTIONARY
AND YOU CAN'T COME UP
WITH THE APPROPRIATE
THING TO SAY
TO SOMEONE WHOSE LIFE
YOU'VE TAKEN.
OR TO THEIR FAMILY MEMBERS.
NOTHING FITS.  NOTHING.
IT'S A TENSION.
IT'S ALMOST A--
A FORCE FIELD OF TENSION
AND HOPELESSNESS.
AND THAT'S WHAT
THIS CAMP IS PARTICULARLY.
HAMILTON A&I-- THE JOKE IS
IT'S HAMILTON "LAY AND DIE."
IT'S NOT LIKE WE'RE A FAMILY.
BUT THEN AGAIN,
IT'S ALMOST LIKE
IT'S US AGAINST THE WORLD
IN SOME SITUATIONS.
THAT PEOPLE HAVE
OSTRACIZED US
AND WE'RE THE GARBAGE
OF SOCIETY.
WE'RE STILL HUMAN BEINGS.
I WOULD HATE TO THINK
THAT I WAS BORN
AND WENT THROUGH MY WHOLE LIFE
TO END UP IN PRISON FOR MURDER.
THAT DOESN'T FIT.
BUT IT SEEMS A WASTE
TO BE IN GOOD HEALTH
AND ACCOMPLISHING
NOTHING-- NOTHING.
JUST A WASTE OF TIME,
A WASTE OF TAXPAYER'S MONEY.
IF I'D KNOWN I WAS
GOING TO HAVE TO BE HERE
ALL THIS TIME,
I WISH THEY'D JUST CARRIED
ME OUT TO THE PARKING LOT
AND SHOT ME IN THE HEAD.
WHO PLANNED ON
COMING TO PRISON?
SO, YOU HAVE THIS SHOOT.
EVERYTHING COMES OUT.
ALL THE PICTURES ARE GREAT.
TRANSPORTATION'S GOOD.
YOUR RECORDERS
WHILE YOU WERE HERE WERE GOOD.
EVERYTHING'S WORKING ON TIME,
ON BUDGET, ON EVERYTHING,
AND THEN YOU CELEBRATE.
YOU'RE OUT RIDING AROUND.
YOU HAVE MAYBE ONE
OR TWO DRINKS TOO MUCH
AND IT IMPAIRS YOUR REACTION
TIME AND YOUR VISION.
YOU BUST AN INTERSECTION.
YOU KILL SOMEBODY IN ANOTHER CAR
OR KILL SOMEBODY IN YOUR CAR.
- IN ALABAMA,
THAT'S VEHICULAR MURDER.
- RIGHT.
THAT'S IT.
Jerry Jackson:
THAT WAS A SATURDAY NIGHT
PARTY.
I HAD A LITTLE TOO MUCH
TO DRINK AND HAD A CAR WRECK.
BROTHER GOT KILLED--
MY BABY BROTHER.
HE WAS AT THAT TIME... 29.
A LOT OF TIMES
I WISH THAT WOULD HAVE BEEN
ME DIED INSTEAD OF HIM.
ME AND HIM WAS
IN SOME WAYS SO CLOSE,
SO THAT'S WHY IT WAS
SO HARD WHEN HE DIED,
YOU KNOW,
FOR ME TO ACCEPT IT.
AND MY MOM AND THEM,
THEY WOULDN'T LET ME GO
TO THE FUNERAL,
SO I NEVER DID GET
A CLOSING IN THE SITUATION.
AND I FINALLY GOT ENOUGH NERVE
TO GO TO THE CEMETERY.
AND NOTHING COULD COME OUT.
I COULDN'T SAY NOTHING.
I JUST STOOD THERE
FOR 4 HOURS.
PEOPLE SAY HOW THEY FEEL
WHEN THEY SHOOT SOMEBODY,
SOMEBODY YOU DON'T KNOW,
BUT WHEN IT COMES DOWN
TO SOMEBODY YOU KNOW,
AND YOU'RE CLOSE TO HIM,
THEY HAVE NO IDEA WHAT
A PERSON GOES THROUGH.
YOU KNOW, I'M GOING TO BE
IN MY PRISON THE REST OF MY LIFE
AND IT DON'T
HAVE WALLS ON IT.
SO THAT'S WHAT HURTS
THE MOST, YOU KNOW?
I GOT TO DEAL WITH THIS ISSUE
THE REST OF MY LIFE.
THAT I'M THE CAUSE
OF MY BROTHER'S DEATH.
SO, YOU KNOW,
THAT'S MY ISSUE.
Levine:
GOOD. I LIKE THE BLACK
AND WHITE ON HIM.
- Assistant: YOU WANT BLACK?
- YEAH, JUST LIKE THAT.
THAT'S GREAT.
HOW ABOUT A SMILE
TO GET THAT TOOTH?
YEAH, YEAH, OH YEAH.
PERFECT. JUST KIND OF
COCK YOUR HEAD A TOUCH.
Jackson:
I WOKE UP THIS MORNING AND SAID
I GOT EXACTLY 10 MONTHS.
I TOLD MY WIFE
IT DOESN'T MATTER
IF I GET OUT BEFORE SCHOOL'S OUT
OR THROUGH THE SCHOOL DAYS,
I'M TAKING OUT THE KIDS
AND WE'RE GOING TO FLORIDA.
YOU CAN BE READY OR NOT.
Levine:
OKAY. THAT'S GREAT.
YOU'RE COOKED, SIR.
SO SHE SAID, "WELL, I ALWAYS
KEEP OUR BAG PACKED, DEAR."
FLORIDA, I'M COMING.
Man:
* LORD, I'M LOOKING
* LORD, FOR THE ROAD
* LEAD ME HOME
* I'VE BEEN SEARCHING
* NIGHT AND DAY
* LORD, BUT IT SEEMS LIKE
* I LOST MY WAY
* TELL ME WHERE
* LORD, IS THE ROAD?
* I WANT TO GO HOME.
Michael Wou:
THIS ONE SEEMS PUNCHIER. WE GET
BETTER CONTRAST AND EVERYTHING.
IT REALLY BRINGS OUT
ALL HIS WRINKLES
A LITTLE BIT MORE.
Levine:
YOU'RE STARING
INTO A GUY'S FACE
THAT IS FOUR TIMES
THE SIZE OF LIFE-SIZE.
AND YOU CAN'T HELP BUT JUST
KIND OF BE AWED BY IT.
AND BE AWED BY THE FACT THAT
HE LOOKS LIKE ANY OTHER
OLD GUY ON THE STREET.
YOU DON'T KNOW HE'S AN INMATE.
YOU DON'T KNOW HE'S A MURDERER
OR A PEDOPHILE.
HE'S JUST A HUMAN BEING.
YOU JUST LOOK AT HIM AND SAY,
"THERE'S AN OLD MAN."
HOWEVER, THEN YOU READ
WHAT THEY'RE IN FOR,
AND YOU'RE EITHER REPULSED,
OR YOU GO, "OH MY GOD,
HE COULD BE
MY GREAT GRANDFATHER."
THEY WERE BOTH BROUGHT
IN A COUPLE YEARS AGO.
HAMILTON IS 70 OR 71.
JACKSON'S ONLY 51,
HE'S A YOUNG GUY.
- OKAY, OKAY. IT'S BEAUTIFUL.
- BUT EQUALLY GOOD STORIES.
YEAH, THE DETAIL'S AMAZING
ON THAT CAMERA.
Levine:
MICHAEL WOU IS A GREAT
GRAPHIC DESIGNER, FIRST OF ALL.
WE'VE WORKED
SINCE THE EARLY '90s
ON COMMERCIAL PROJECTS,
AND WE'VE WON A LOT
OF AWARDS TOGETHER.
ON THIS PROJECT,
MICHAEL AND I HAVE BEEN
COLLABORATING SINCE DAY ONE.
WE DECIDED, LET'S TRY TO GET
AN EXHIBITION TOGETHER,
WITH THE LARGE PRINTS.
LET'S TRY TO GET A BOOK
TOGETHER
AND TELL THIS UNTOLD STORY
TO THE PUBLIC.
SIMON'S GOOD, THIS GUY HERE.
I PROCESSED--
Wou:
WE ARE RIDING A VERY FINE LINE.
BECAUSE OBVIOUSLY,
IF I WAS
ON THE VICTIM'S SIDE,
I WOULD BE VERY
ANGRY AND WANT THESE GUYS
TO BE PUT AWAY FOREVER.
KNOWING THEIR STORIES,
COMING FACE TO FACE,
ALMOST LIVING WITH THEM,
YOU SEE A WHOLE OTHER
SIDE TO IT.
SO IT'S VERY DIFFICULT.
WE DON'T WANT TO DEMONIZE THEM,
BUT WE DON'T WANT
TO GLORIFY THEM. SO IT'S ALWAYS
RIDING THE FINE LINE.
AND WHAT WE WANT TO DO
IS LET EVERYONE MAKE UP
THEIR OWN MINDS,
MAKE UP THEIR OWN DECISION.
WHAT YOU GET OUT OF THIS
IS UP TO YOU.
I STILL THINK WE
GO WITH THESE SHOTS
OF CALVIN FROM '97.
Wou:
HE'S LOST A LOT OF WEIGHT.
HE'S LOST SOME TEETH TOO.
- IS HE STILL SINGING?
- STILL SINGING.
Calvin Selman:
I BEEN IN PRISON
EVER SINCE '68.
HAMILTON IS THE BEST
SYSTEM I'VE BEEN TO.
- YOU'RE IN PRISON--
- UH-HUH.
BECAUSE OF THE OLD CRIME
YOU DONE, BACK IN WHAT?
ABOUT 1960...
- '67.
- 1967?
- UH-HUH.
- JUST BRIEFLY,
IF YOU DON'T MIND,
IF YOU WANT TO,
TELL A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT IT. AND THEN,
YOU WROTE
THIS SONG ABOUT IT.
I WROTE
TWO SONG ABOUT IT.
DO YOU MIND SINGING
ONE OF THEM SONGS?
* I'M DOWN IN KILBY PRISON
DOING LIFE WITH NO PAROLE *
* MURDERED TWO GOOD PEOPLE
AND I DIDN'T HAVE NO CAUSE *
* I WAS DRINKING
BEER AND WHISKEY *
* TAKING DOPE,
SO DON'T YOU SEE? *
* THAT'S THE REASON WHY
THEY GAVE ME LIFE *
* INSTEAD OF KILLING ME
* IF I COULD LIVE MY LIFE OVER
I KNOW THAT I WOULD CHANGE *
* I KNOW I WOULD
NOT KILL NO ONE *
* FOR IT'S A DIRTY SHAME
* I WOULD NOT DRINK
ANY WHISKEY, TAKE NO DOPE,
DRINK NO BEER *
* THAT'S THE HONEST REASON WHY
THAT I HAVE LIFE IN HERE. *
THAT'S PRETTY GOOD, CALVIN.
WHEN DID YOU WRITE THAT SONG?
I WROTE IT IN 1968.
YOU'RE GOING TO BE
A MOVIE STAR, I BETCHA.
THEY'RE GOING TO PRODUCE THIS,
SEND IT OFF TO HOLLYWOOD.
ME AND YOU,
WE'LL GO TO HOLLYWOOD.
- WE'LL GO TO HOLLYWOOD.
- YEAH.
JUST TURN YOUR HEAD
TOWARDS ME A BIT.
THAT'S GREAT.
AND AGAIN. GREAT.
YOU KNOW WHAT WE'RE
GOING TO DO NOW?
PUT THE COFFEE CUP DOWN.
WE'RE JUST GOING TO PHOTOGRAPH
YOUR HANDS.
Billy Owen:
A LOT OF THESE GUYS
WILL DIE HERE.
A LARGE PORTION
OF THE OLDER INMATES
HAVE SPENT THE LARGEST PART
OF THEIR LIFE IN PRISON.
AND THEIR CRIMINAL RECORDS--
IT'S REALLY HARD FOR THEM
TO EVER GET A PAROLE
IN THE STATE OF ALABAMA
AND THEY'LL END UP DYING HERE.
Levine:
YOU KNOW WHAT
WE'RE GOING TO DO?
WE'LL GIVE YOU SOME
POLAROIDS AND SEND YOU SOME
PICTURES IN A FEW MONTHS.
Owen:
THEY REALIZE, AT THEIR
POINT IN TIME IN LIFE,
IF THEY COULD TELL THEIR STORY,
IF THEY COULD SHOW THEIR
PICTURE TO A YOUNG MAN,
AND MAKE THEM UNDERSTAND THIS
IS WHAT HAPPENS TO YOU AFTER 20
OR 30 OR 40 YEARS OF CRIME,
I THINK THEY'D LIKE
TO MAKE THAT POINT.
RIGHT OVER HERE.
MR. DAVIS!
YOU SEE, I DIDN'T
FORGET YOU.
- YOU FORGOT ME.
- I DIDN'T FORGET YOU AT ALL.
I KNOW YOU AIN'T.
THE REST OF THEM FORGOT ME.
NO, NO, WE'RE GOING
TO GET A PICTURE OF YOU
AND YOU'RE GOING TO GET AS MANY
POLAROIDS AS YOU WANT, OKAY?
Wou:
RON'S UNIQUE TAKE
ON PHOTOGRAPHY
IS THAT HE ALWAYS MANAGES
TO BRING OUT THE BEST
IN A PERSON-- WHAT I MEAN BY
THE BEST IN A PERSON,
I'M NOT SAYING TO MAKE EVERYONE
LOOK LIKE A MOVIE STAR.
I'M JUST SAYING, TO FIND OUT
WHO THIS PERSON IS IN ESSENCE,
WHO THIS PERSON TRULY IS,
AND TO BRING THAT OUT
IN A PERSON.
- Levine: I TELL YOU.
- Wou: YOU CAN JUST FEEL THINGS.
I KNOW. I CAN.
Wou:
THEY ARE NO WAY DEMONIZED.
THEY ARE NO WAY GLORIFIED.
THAT IS HIS TALENT.
Levine:
HOW DID YOU END UP IN
THE PREDICAMENT YOU'RE IN NOW?
HOW DID YOU END UP
SHOOTING HER?
- FIRST TIME I HIT HER
RIGHT IN THERE.
- OH!
NEXT TIME I HIT HER TWICE
IN THE STOMACH, AND A HALF INCH
FROM HER HEART.
IF SHE HADN'T BEEN DRINKING,
SHE WOULD'VE DIED.
BUT I STILL CARE FOR HER.
I AIN'T GOING TO LIE.
- Levine: SHE DIDN'T DIE?
- HUH-UH.
THEY SAID IF SHE HADN'T
BEEN DRINKING,
SHE WOULD'VE
DIED THOUGH.
Gary Pinyon:
I NEVER BEEN IN TROUBLE
BEFORE IN MY LIFE.
MATTER OF FACT, I WAS IN LAW
ENFORCEMENT FOR ABOUT 3 YEARS.
I BEEN ON BOTH SIDES NOW.
AND HOW ABOUT PUTTING
THE CHIN DOWN A LITTLE MORE.
GOOD. THAT'S GREAT.
LET'S TRY IT WITH THE HAT OFF.
JUST TAKE THE HAT OFF
AND PUT IT IN YOUR HANDS.
GOOD.
Pinyon:
I BEEN LOCKED UP
ABOUT 14 YEARS NOW.
OKAY, THAT'S NICE.
GREAT. GREAT.
WE'LL JUST SHOOT
A LITTLE BIT HIGHER
ON THE TREE.
GOOD.
THAT'S NICE.
Pinyon:
I GOT A LIFE SENTENCE.
IT'S REALLY INCREDIBLE
HOW HE GOT IN THERE TOO.
HE FELL IN LOVE
WITH THE WRONG WOMAN,
I THINK.
FELL IN LOVE WITH THE WOMAN
WANTED TO...
SHE WANTED TO HAVE
HER HUSBAND KILLED.
HE SAID IT TOOK HER
ABOUT A YEAR.
THAT'S RIGHT.
- BEFORE SHE TALKED HIM INTO IT.
- AND THEN HE HIRED A HIT MAN
TO DO THE JOB.
SHE WAS AN ABUSED WOMAN.
SHE WAS ABUSED REAL BAD.
AND THAT'S...
ONE OF THE REASONS
I HELPED HER DO IT.
A LOT OF PEOPLE
THINK IT WAS THE MONEY.
MONEY NEVER MADE ME HAPPY.
I WAS GOING THROUGH
A REAL BAD TIME IN MY LIFE THEN,
THAT'S WHY I LEFT MY WIFE.
I WASN'T HAPPY WITH ANYTHING.
I WASN'T HAPPY WITH EVEN MYSELF.
I JUST--
NOTHING MADE ME HAPPY.
LIKE I SAY, I'VE BEEN MORE
CONTENT NOW THAN I'VE EVER HAVE
IN MY LIFE I GUESS.
NOT THAT I'M LOCKED UP,
IT'S NOT A GOOD PLACE
TO BE, IN PRISON.
BUT I THINK I'D BE REAL
HAPPY ON THE STREET,
IF I EVER GET OUT.
I'D BE CONTENT
IN MOST ANYTHING I DID.
WE WAS PUTTING OUT SQUASH,
SETTING OUT SQUASH.
WE GOT ABOUT...
400 PLANTS
WE'RE GOING TO PUT OUT.
I GOT FIVE ROWS
AND I USUALLY GET ABOUT
2500 LBS. A SEASON OFF OF THEM.
THEY PLANTED 200 LBS.
OF SWEET POTATOES
AND WE'LL PROBABLY GET
ABOUT 3,000 LBS. OFF OF THEM,
WHICH DON'T LAST LONG
WHEN YOU'RE TRYING TO FEED
300 PEOPLE.
HUNGRY MOUTHS.
SOMETHING FRESH
OUT OF THE GARDEN.
- Man: HOW MANY DO YOU GOT?
- 39.
Levine:
YOU BASICALLY BECOME
POWERLESS IN PRISON,
BECAUSE YOU LOSE YOUR POWER
IN PRISON ANYWAY TO RUN
YOUR LIFE.
EVERYTHING IS DONE FOR YOU.
YOU'RE TOLD WHEN TO COME
FOR BREAKFAST,
FOR PILL CALL.  YOU'RE TOLD
BY THE OTHER INMATES
WHAT TO DO AND WHAT NOT TO DO,
IF YOU'RE AN OLDER FEEBLE GUY.
AND YOU SEE THAT
IN SOME OF THESE OLD GUYS.
THEY'RE VERY HAPPY JUST TO SIT
IN FRONT OF THE TV ALL DAY,
WATCH "COURT TV"
OR WATCH CRIME SHOWS,
PLAY PINOCHLE OR DOMINOES,
SMOKE THEIR CIGARETTES,
GO BACK INTO THEIR BUNK,
TAKE A NAP.
IT'S LIKE AN OLD AGE HOME.
IT IS AN OLD AGE HOME
BASICALLY-- THEY'RE BEING
TAKEN CARE OF,
THEY'RE BEING CATERED TO,
BEING GIVEN THEIR MEALS
AT 5:00 A.M.,
11:00 A.M. AND 4:00 P.M.,
PUT TO BED AT 6:00.
AND THAT'S THEIR LIFE
FOR THE NEXT 30, 40 YEARS,
OR UNTIL THEY DIE.
SO YOU FEEL POWERLESS,
YOU PROBABLY FEEL EMPTY,
AND YOU FEEL HOPELESS.
THAT AGES YOU,
THAT DETERIORATES YOU,
YOU WIND UP IN THE INFIRMARY,
YOU DIE AT 65 OR 70.
* MY, MY, MY,
MY, MY, MY, MY OH. *
Jay Boyett:
WE'RE LINING UP RIGHT HERE
FOR PILL CALL.
WE DO PILL CALL HERE
ABOUT FIVE TIMES A DAY.
YOU'RE GOING TO SEE
ABOUT ANY KIND OF ILLNESS
THAT THERE IS
HERE AT THIS CAMP.
THANK YOU.
Cheryl Cofield:
I HAVE SEVERAL SCHIZOPHRENICS,
SCHIZO-AFFECTIVE,
I HAVE BI-POLAR.
I HAVE MANIC-DEPRESSIVE
WITH PSYCHOSIS.
I HAVE P.T.S.D.
I HAVE DEPRESSION,
ANXIETY, PANIC DISORDER.
WE HAVE SEVERAL THAT HAVE
DEMENTIA AND ALZHEIMER'S,
AND THEY GO THE SAME ROUTE AS
SOMEONE IN A NURSING HOME
OR HOSPITAL WITH THAT.
THERE'S JUST NOT A WHOLE LOT
YOU CAN DO
WHEN THEY COME
TO THAT STAGE OF LIFE.
JUST MAKE THEM COMFORTABLE.
THEY KNOW THEY'RE NOT
GOING ANYWHERE.
IT'S HARD TO HAVE HOPE
WHEN YOU KNOW YOU'RE
NOT GOING ANY PLACE.
YOU'RE HERE FOREVER.
A YOUNGER PRISONER COSTS
ABOUT $20,000 A YEAR TO KEEP,
WHEREAS AN OLDER ONE
IS $60,000 TO $75,000,
JUST BECAUSE OF ALL
OF THE MEDICAL COSTS.
OF COURSE,
THEY NEED THE OXYGEN.
THEY NEED THE DOCTORS.
THEY NEED THE NURSES.
THEY NEED ALL SORTS
OF SPECIAL EQUIPMENT,
FROM CRUTCHES TO WHEELCHAIRS.
THEY NEED PRETTY MUCH
24-HOUR CARE.
Dr. Wyndol Hamer:
WE SEE EVERYTHING FROM
SEVERE DIABETES
TO INFECTIONS TO TUMORS,
HYPERTENSION,
CHRONIC LUNG DISEASE,
MENTAL ILLNESS,
JUST THE WHOLE GAMUT.
NOW THIS IS
DIABETIC NEUROPATHY.
- I DON'T THINK--
- NEUROPATHY--
YEAH, IT'S DIABETES.
THAT LOOKS BETTER,
I THINK.
CLOSE YOUR EYES,
DON'T CHEAT ON ME.
I'M NOT GOING TO STAB YOU.
I JUST WANT YOU TO TELL ME
IF YOU FEEL SOMETHING.
- WHAT ABOUT THAT?
- Patient: NO.
- THAT?
- YEAH.
- NO.
- NOW?
Hamer:
MOST ALL OF THESE
HAVE CHRONIC DISEASE
AND THAT'S WHY THEY'RE HERE.
AND BECAUSE OF THAT,
THEY'RE ALL
GROUPED INTO THIS
INFIRMARY SITUATION,
HOUSED TOGETHER.
THEY TEND TO TRADE INFECTIONS.
IT'S VERY MUCH LIKE
AN ARMY OR A NURSING HOME,
BECAUSE OF STAPH INFECTIONS
AND BACTERIAL INFECTIONS ARE
EASILY SPREAD BY CONTACT.
Autrey Nichols:
I HAVE CRONE'S DISEASE.
IT'S A TYPE OF CANCER.
THEY SAY IT'S WORSE
THAN ACTUAL CANCER
BECAUSE IT ATTACKS
EVERY ORGAN IN YOUR BODY.
SO IT'S DEADLY.
THEY GIVE ME A CERTAIN
AMOUNT OF TIME TO LIVE.
SO FAR I'VE OUTLIVED--
I'VE LIVED FOUR YEARS LONGER
THAN THEY SAID I WOULD.
BUT I'M A STRONG-WILLED
PERSON.
MULE HEADED IS WHAT
MY DADDY USED TO CALL ME.
SO I'M PRETTY STRONG WILLED,
AND I DON'T FEEL LIKE I'LL DIE
IN PENITENTIARY.
I WANT TO GO HOME TO MY FAMILY,
AND, YOU KNOW,
HOPEFULLY LIVE THAT LONG
TO GO HOME AND DIE AT HOME,
IN MY OWN BED.
SO THIS PLACE HAS
CHANGED SINCE '99, HUH?
'CAUSE THIS ROOM WASN'T HERE.
YEAH, WHEN YOU
WERE HERE LAST,
THIS ROOM HERE HOUSED
THE HEALTHY INMATES.
EXACTLY.
I REMEMBER THAT.
WE'VE HAD TO EXPAND IT.
WE'VE GOT 21 GUYS HERE.
ONE OF THEM, RIGHT NOW,
IS ON HIS DEATHBED
RIGHT OVER HERE.
HE'S NOT EXPECTED TO LIVE
VERY MUCH LONGER AT ALL.
OKAY, SO FRANKIE,
WHY DON'T YOU TAKE
A READING?
5.6, STRONG, ALMOST 8.
YOU WANT ME TO CLOSE AT 8?
NO, WE WON'T--
BECAUSE WE WON'T NEED TO.
WE'RE GONNA LOAD...
LOCK AND LOAD.
AND LOOK RIGHT
IN THE LENS.
GOOD.
Levine:
MR. WHITLEY, WHY DON'T YOU
TELL US YOUR FULL NAME?
- BOYD WHITLEY.
- AND HOW OLD ARE YOU,
MR. WHITLEY?
Whitely:
80, I'LL BE 80 IN AUGUST.
Levine:
OKAY, GREAT.
NOW, YOU'RE HERE
IN THE HOSPITAL
BECAUSE, WHAT HAPPENED?
WHAT DID THEY FIND OUT?
THERE'S CANCER IN ME,
IN HERE.
- IN THE ESOPHAGUS.
- YEAH.
IT'S A LITTLE TUMOR.
THEY SAID, ABOUT THAT BIG,
IN BETWEEN MY HEART
AND MY ESOPHAGUS.
IT GOT IT PUSHED TOGETHER AND I
GOT A HOLE IN MY ESOPHAGUS.
IF I TRY TO SWALLOW,
IT MISSES--
IT MISSES THE BELLY
AND GOES IN THROUGH THE HOLE.
Levine:
AND MEANWHILE, THEY GOT YOU
EATING OUT OF A TUBE.
OKAY, I SEE, I SEE.
ALL RIGHT.
WELL, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
I THINK OVER THE NEXT 10 YEARS,
IT'LL WILL TURN
MORE INTO
A CORRECTIONAL HOSPITAL,
MORE THAN ANYTHING.
BUT I THINK THAT'S THE FUTURE
OF THE PRISON SYSTEM.
YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE TO TAKE
CARE OF THE OLD GUYS.
IF YOU KEEP PUTTING GUYS
INTO PRISON AND THEY KEEP
GROWING OLD IN PRISON,
AND CUT BACK ON THE PAROLES
AND THE PARDONS,
YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE
THESE OLD GUYS IN EVERY STATE.
YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE A PRISON
LIKE THIS IN EVERY STATE.
Wou:
THIS IS WHAT SOCIETY
IS PAYING FOR.
AND WHEN YOU LOOK AT HOW MANY
INMATES ARE IN THERE,
THAT ARE IN THE ELDERLY
POPULATION,
WE'RE TALKING THOUSANDS
AND THOUSANDS AND THOUSANDS.
AND WHAT IS THAT
ALL COSTING US?
SO THERE'S GOT TO BE
A BETTER WAY TO DO THIS.
Levine:
BACK IN '97,
WE DECIDED, "WELL, WE'VE GOT
TO GET SOME OTHER PRISONS
IN HERE.
WE'VE GOT TO MAKE IT
A MORE GLOBAL STORY."
AND SO
I DECIDED TO START
PHOTOGRAPHING IN CANADA.
WE PHOTOGRAPHED IN ARCHAMBAULT.
WE PHOTOGRAPHED A COUPLE
OTHER PRISONS IN QUEBEC.
WE PHOTOGRAPHED
A COUPLE OF WOMEN'S PRISONS
OVER THE PAST FEW YEARS.
AND THEN WE PHOTOGRAPHED
IN WARKWORTH.
IT'S JUST ABOUT
TWO HOURS OUT OF TORONTO.
INITIALLY
WE WENT THERE IN '99.
IT'S A STANDARD PRISON.
IT'S BASICALLY A HUGE
PRISON FACILITY,
HUGE STEEL GATES, CEMENT WALLS.
NOTHING LIKE HAMILTON AT ALL.
NOW WARKWORTH IS THE LARGEST
PENITENTIARY IN CANADA.
IT'S ONLY 600 INMATES,
THAT'S LIKE
A MINISCULE PENITENTIARY
IN THE UNITED STATES.
BUT WARKWORTH IS A PLACE
WHERE THEY SEEM
TO SEGREGATE MOST
OF THE ELDERLY INMATES
FROM ACROSS CANADA.
IN FACT, THEY STARTED
A SENIORS' GROUP IN WARKWORTH
BECAUSE OF THAT,
BECAUSE THERE'S SO MANY
ELDERLY INMATES.
Don Campbell:
DO YOU WANT THE GLOVE UP?
OR ANYTHING DIFFERENT?
Levine:
NO, JUST LIKE THAT'S NICE.
THAT'S GREAT.
YOU KNOW WHAT?
DON, GET THE LEGS
A LITTLE CLOSER TOGETHER,
MAYBE TURN YOUR BODY
A BIT MORE THAT WAY.
THAT'S IT.  THAT'S GOOD.
LET'S SEE HOW THAT LOOKS.
DON CAMPBELL IS THE DIRECTOR
OF THE SENIORS' GROUP AT
THE WARKWORTH PRISON.
Campbell:
THERE'S 174 LIFERS
HERE RIGHT NOW.
AND HOW MANY
IN THE ELDERLY GROUP?
THERE'S ABOUT 170,
AND IT'S NOT THE SAME NUMBERS,
OF COURSE.
- THERE'S A CROSSOVER?
- BUT YES.
FOR ABOUT 23 YEARS,
I WAS THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
OF AN ORGANIZATION
FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY
HANDICAPPED.
ONE EVENING IN JANUARY 1998,
AFTER A CAR CRASH,
I WAS CHARGED
WITH FIRST DEGREE MURDER.
I'M NOW SERVING LIFE 25,
WHICH IS CURRENTLY UNDER APPEAL
FOR BOTH THE SENTENCE
AND THE CONVICTION.
I'M IN THE NON-SMOKING
80-MAN UNIT
AND I'M INVOLVED IN WORK
AT THE LIBRARY.
I DO A NUMBER
OF SPECIAL PROJECTS
AROUND THE INSTITUTION,
SUCH AS THE HEALTH FAIR
AND RUNNING VARIOUS SYMPOSIUMS,
SUCH AS
THE SENIORS' SYMPOSIUM.
THIS IS THE 2004 HEALTH FAIR,
AND THIS IS THE FOURTH YEAR
WE'VE HELD THIS EVENT.
HEALTH CARE IS
A MAJOR CONCERN
TO INDIVIDUALS
THAT ARE AGING IN PRISON.
AND IT GIVES US A CHANCE TO
DEAL WITH SOME OF THE PEOPLE
THAT HAVE HEALTH CONCERNS
AND WANT TO GET BETTER ADVICE
AND INFORMATION ON HEALTH.
WE'RE EXPECTING OVER
400 MEN HERE THIS AFTERNOON
FROM THE POPULATION.
FELLOWS THAT ARE CONCERNED
ABOUT DIABETES AND THEIR
HEART AND STROKE,
AND THIS IS OF MAJOR
CONSEQUENCE TO THE PEOPLE.
Levine:
I THINK IN CANADA
WHAT WE'VE NOTICED IS THAT
THEY TRY TO REHABILITATE
THE INMATES,
MORE THAN THEY HAVE
IN THE STATES.
THEY TRY TO WEAN THE PRISONERS
OUT OF THE PRISON SYSTEM,
SO EVENTUALLY THEY CAN
GO TO HALFWAY HOMES,
EVENTUALLY THEY CAN BE CITIZENS
AGAIN ON THE OUTSIDE.
IN WARKWORTH, WHAT THEY HAD
WAS THIS AREA
CALLED THE CORCAN AREA.
THERE'S A BARBERSHOP.
THERE'S CAR REPAIR.
THERE'S ENGINE REBUILDING.
THEY TEACH THE INMATES
CABINETMAKING.
AND THERE WAS ALSO
A CAR BODY SHOP.
ONE OF THE SIDELINES
THAT THE CORCAN OPERATION
CAN SOMETIMES GET INVOLVED IN
IS COMMUNITY SERVICE PROJECTS.
THAT BRINGS A WHOLE DIFFERENT
DIMENSION OF LEARNING
FOR THE INMATES.
THE FIRE TRUCK,
FOR INSTANCE,
IT'S ONE OF MANY THEY'VE DONE
IN THE PAST FOR VARIOUS
COMMUNITY GROUPS.
AND IT GIVES THE INMATES
A REAL SENSE OF FULFILLMENT
FROM DOING THAT,
AS WELL AS GIVING BACK
TO THE COMMUNITY.
RIGHT OVER HERE.
THAT'S GOOD, GUYS.
LET ME TAKE A FAST LOOK
INSIDE THERE.
NOW WE SEE THE CAB
A HELL OF A LOT BETTER.
SO...
GONNA GET
SOME GUY IN THERE.
Levine:
IT'S A UNIQUE OBJECTIVE
FOR THE PRISON SYSTEM
TO ACTUALLY GIVE THESE GUYS
A TRADE, SO WHEN THEY
GET OUT THERE,
THEY CAN BE MEMBERS
OF SOCIETY AGAIN.
SO THEY WON'T BE
WITHOUT A TRADE
AFTER BEING IN PRISON
FOR 15, 20 YEARS,
LIKE ED FRANCIS.
Edward Francis:
I WAS A PRODUCT OF
THE CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY,
BECAUSE OF MY DAD'S DRINKING.
I SPENT A LOT OF YEARS
ON THE STREETS
AS A YOUNG MAN,
AND I HAD A HOME TO GO TO.
IT'S NOT LIKE I GOT KICKED OUT.
I HAD A HOME TO GO TO,
IF YOU WANT TO CALL IT THAT
AT THE TIME.
I JUST DIDN'T WANT TO GO HOME.
I'D SEE ME IN THE WINTERTIME
IN THE HALLWAYS,
SHAKING, COLD, HUNGRY,
BUT I DIDN'T WANT
TO GO HOME.
BECAUSE I WAS AFRAID TO GO HOME.
I WAS TERRIFIED TO GO HOME.
AND SO I THINK SEXUAL ABUSE,
VERBAL ABUSE,
PHYSICAL ABUSE,
JUST MENTAL ABUSE--
FOR YEARS AND YEARS OF MY LIFE.
Levine:
I UNDERSTAND YOU'VE GOT
SOME INTERESTING TATTOOS.
- YOU KNOW WHAT--
- OH, THAT'S GREAT.
THE CROW IS ACTUALLY--
- I'M OJIBWAY, EH?
- SURE.
AND THE CROW
IS MY SPIRIT BIRD.
I'M AN ALCOHOLIC,
I'M A DRUG ADDICT.
I'VE GOT NO PROBLEM
ADMITTING THAT.
I'VE DONE SPEED,
L.S.D.,
POT, HASH, PEYOTE.
BUT ALCOHOL HAS ALWAYS
BEEN MY THING, EH?
THAT'S ALWAYS BEEN, LIKE,
MY DRUG OF CHOICE, EH?
RIGHT NOW I'M DOING
A DOUBLE LIFE SENTENCE
AND MY PAROLE DOESN'T
COME UP UNTIL 2013.
THE POLICE SAID AFTER
THAT IT WAS JUST A COLD-BLOODED
OLD GANGLAND-STYLE THING,
AND I RESENTED THAT.
I RESENTED THAT BECAUSE
THEY HAD NO IDEA
WHAT TRANSPIRED
UP THERE THAT NIGHT.
YOU GOT THE MOTHER--
THE ONE MOTHER-- MY ONE
VICTIM'S MOTHER, YOU KNOW?
OUT IN COURT,
AND SHE'D LOOK AT ME,
SHE'D JUST LOOK AT MY EYES
AND SHE'D SAY, "WHY DID
YOU KILL MY SON?
WHY DID YOU KILL MY SON?"
WHAT DO YOU SAY?
THERE'S NOTHING YOU CAN SAY.
THERE'S NOTHING YOU CAN DO.
I CAN'T BRING THEM BACK.
YOU KNOW?
UM...
THEY'RE GONE. AND THERE
WAS A HEAVY PRICE TO PAY
FOR MY ALCOHOLISM.
THERE'S A HEAVY PRICE TO PAY
FOR MY STUBBORNNESS,
FOR MY PRIDE, FOR MY EGO.
AND THIS IS IT, THIS IS IT.
MY BUDDY SAYS, "WELL, YOU WON."
I SAID, "HOW DID I WIN?"
HE GOES, "WELL, YOU'RE ALIVE
AND THEY'RE DEAD."
I GO, "HOW DID I WIN?
YES, THEY'RE DEAD, I'M GOING
AWAY FOR LIFE.
WHO THE HELL WON
OUT OF THIS SITUATION?
WHO WON?"
AND GUYS WILL SAY TO ME,
"HEY, COME ON, HAVE A DRINK.
HAVE A DRINK."
AND I SAY, "WHY DO I
WANT A DRINK, MAN?
WHY WOULD I WANT A DRINK?
THE LAST TIME I DRANK
TWO PEOPLE ENDED UP
DEAD AND I'M DOING LIFE.
WHY DO I WANT THAT?"
OKAY, I'M GOING
TO MOVE THE CAMERA IN
A LITTLE BIT TIGHTER.
- YOU WANNA STICK WITH
BLACK AND WHITE FOR BIT?
- YEAH.
David McClure:
I WAS AN ORGANIST IN CHURCHES
FOR A NUMBER OF YEARS,
AND SOLOIST IN CHURCHES,
AND A CHOIR LEADER.
I HAD A BRIEF STINT AT--
TWO DIFFERENT STINTS
AT THE ROYAL ONTARIO MUSEUM
AS A LECTURER THERE.
I WORKED FOR INDIAN AFFAIRS
AS A MUSIC SUPERVISOR
IN CENTRAL ONTARIO.
SO I'VE HAD A WEALTH
OF EXPERIENCE.
Levine:
ALL RIGHT, HERE WE GO.
GOOD, THAT'S ONE.
McClure:
I'M IN FOR SEXUAL ASSAULT.
Levine:
HOW MANY YEARS DID THEY
GIVE YOU FOR THE CRIME?
- McClure: INDEFINITE.
- INDEFINITE?
YES, SO I COULD DIE HERE.
A LOT OF MEN HAVE.
FIVE MEN HAVE DIED
SINCE I'VE BEEN HERE.
AGING IN PRISON IS VERY
DIFFICULT BECAUSE, REALLY,
THE SYSTEM'S NOT SET UP
TO TAKE CARE
OF THE AGING INDIVIDUALS
WHO ARE HERE.
FOR EXAMPLE, I TAKE
AT LEAST 25 PILLS A DAY,
I HAVE 12 DIFFERENT
PRESCRIPTIONS OF MEDICATION.
I HAVE HEART PROBLEMS,
LUNG PROBLEMS, THYROID,
AND I'M A DIABETIC.
Levine:
McCLURE LIVES
IN THE 80-MAN UNIT,
THE GERIATRIC UNIT,
OVER AT WARKWORTH.
AND THE PLACE IS MORE SUITED
FOR A FELLOW LIKE HIM--
THE 80-MAN UNIT,
BECAUSE HE HAS
THE WHEELCHAIR ACCESS.
THEY'VE ADDED ALL KINDS OF
RAMPS AT WARKWORTH,
WHICH IS SOMETHING
I HAVEN'T SEEN AT MANY
OF THE OTHER PRISONS.
SO IT'S EASIER FOR THEM
TO GET AROUND.
EASIER FOR A MAN LIKE
McCLURE WHO'S GOING TO BE IN
FOR A LONG TIME.
I THINK HE'S GOT AN
INDETERMINATE SENTENCE ON HIM.
THE 80-MAN UNIT
IS PROBABLY A LOT SAFER
FOR THE SEX CRIMINALS
BECAUSE THEY DON'T
SEEM TO GET PREYED UPON
BY THE YOUNGER GUYS.
IT'S A LITTLE MORE PRIVACY,
A LITTLE MORE SAFETY.
IN 1989 WE OPENED
THE 80-MAN UNIT HERE.
A VERY MODERN FACILITY
WITH A NUMBER OF
HANDICAPPED CELLS
AND AREAS WHERE THE INMATES
CAN MOVE FREELY ABOUT,
WITHOUT HAVING TO GO DOWN
STAIRS TO ACCESS THEIR CELLS,
AND TO ACCESS
COMMON ROOMS.
I WAS JUST IN AWE
OF THE COMMENTS
IN THE BOOK.
- THEY WERE VERY TOUCHING.
- YOU KNOW...
IT WAS SUCH
AN ELOQUENT STATEMENT
TO GROWING OLD IN PRISON,
BUT BEING OLD IN PRISON
AND HOW HARSH IT IS.
AND TO SEE THE OLD MEN
DIE IN PRISON
I THINK IS THE OTHER POINT
OF THIS WHOLE BOOK.
- I LOVED THE BOOK AND IT'S
A PLEASURE TO MEET YOU.
- THANK YOU.
Levine:
MICHAEL WORKED OUT
PRETTY GOOD IN 2 1/4,
ALTHOUGH I THINK I LIKE
THE 4x5 BETTER.
I MEAN,
THE GUY WAS HIGHLY EDUCATED.
IT WAS KIND OF BIZARRE.
HE'S GOT A PhD
IN RUSSIAN HISTORY,
I THINK HE TAUGHT
AT U. OF T. FOR A WHILE.
Michael Ostopovich-Vorontsov:
MY CRIME IS OF SEXUAL ABUSE,
SPECIFICALLY MY BROTHER.
WHEN HE WAS A CHILD,
I GUESS,
AND I WAS IN MY TEENS,
I SEXUALLY ABUSED HIM.
IT WHEN ON
FOR A NUMBER OF YEARS.
LET ME JUST DO
A TEST SHOT HERE.
WE'LL GET YOU
STANDING UP FOR NOW.
YEAH, THAT'S NICE.
NO, WITH YOUR HANDS CLASPED,
THAT'S VERY NICE, ACTUALLY.
FRANCIS, PULL BACK A BIT.
Ostopovich-Vorontsov:
SO PHALLOMETRIC TESTING
TELLS ME
THAT I'M WAY UP THERE
IN THE DEVIANCY SCALE.
THEY PUT THIS LITTLE
ELASTIC THING ON YOUR PENIS
AND YOU GO FROM THERE
AND THEY SHOW YOU,
OH, THE MOST
UNBELIEVABLE VIDEOTAPES.
I HAD A REACTION
TO ALMOST ALL OF IT,
RIGHT ACROSS THE BOARD.
REALLY IT'S JUST THE SHOCK,
THE ABSOLUTE SHOCK
OF THE TEST.
AND I HAD NO IDEA
I WOULD HAVE SCORED SO HIGH.
SO I THOUGHT TO MYSELF, I'M NOT
GOING TO PRETEND I'M NOT GOING
TO DO ANY OF THIS ANYMORE.
I'M GOING TO FACE THE DEMONS
AND GET OVER THEM.
AND HOPEFULLY GET
TO GO HOME ONE DAY.
IF I COULD GO BACK
AND TAKE IT AWAY, I WOULD.
I TRULY WOULD.
I'D TAKE IT ALL AWAY.
BUT I CAN'T.
I-I LOVE MY BROTHER
VERY MUCH
AND I-I-- I REGRET EVERY--
EVERY-- EVERY HURT
THAT I'VE CAUSED HIM,
ABSOLUTELY.
WHEN YOU START REALIZING
THE ABSOLUTE HORROR OF IT,
I MEAN,
THE PAIN AND THE ANGST
AND HOW MANY YEARS
THAT WENT ON.
AND YOU KNOW, YOU JUST--
YOU BLIND YOURSELF TO IT,
ABSOLUTELY.
AND WHEN YOU
ACTUALLY FACE IT,
I MEAN, YOU KNOW,
IT JUST--
IT'S MIND-BOGGLING.
IT REALLY IS.
NOW, READY. LOOK RIGHT
IN THE LENS, SIR.
- GOOD, PERFECT.
- Laroche: AM I IN?
NO, YOU'RE NOT. THAT'S GREAT.
OKAY, READY, I'LL TELL YOU WHEN.
READY, ONE, TWO, THREE, GO.
Levine:
MY ROLE IS TO REALLY GET
THE IMAGES OUT THERE.
I DON'T THINK I TREAT THEM
ANY BETTER OR ANY WORSE
THAN I WOULD ANY OTHER
HUMAN BEING ON THE OUTSIDE.
I DON'T THINK
BECAUSE THEY'RE INMATES,
BECAUSE THEY'VE BEEN
GIVEN A LONG SENTENCE AND ARE
IN PRISON, INCARCERATED,
I DON'T THINK I HAVE
THE RIGHT TO TREAT THEM
ANY DIFFERENTLY.
SURE, SOME OF THEM REPULSE ME.
WHAT THEY'VE DONE REPULSES ME.
BUT I STILL THINK
THEY'RE HUMAN BEINGS.
THEY DESERVE
SOME RESPECT FROM ME,
FROM ANYONE WHO TALKS TO THEM.
ROBERT HENDERSON
BASICALLY SPENT MOST
OF HIS LIFE IN PRISON.
I THINK THERE WAS FIVE YEARS
HE SAID THAT HE WAS ACTUALLY
OUT OF PRISON.
AND NOW HE'S BACK IN
AT 70 YEARS OLD.
Robert Henderson:
I'VE GOT OVER 45 YEARS
IN PRISON.
SO, THERE'S NOT TOO MUCH
THEY CAN TELL ME
ABOUT A PRISON.
OKAY.
Henderson:
I ONLY KNEW MY STEPFATHER.
HE WAS AN ALCOHOLIC.
AND SO WAS MY MOTHER.
THEY WERE BOTH ALCOHOLICS.
AND WHEN I WAS A KID,
THEY USED TO HAVE A LOT
OF PARTIES AROUND THE HOUSE
AND GET DRUNK.
THEY USED TO GIVE ME BEER
IN A BOTTLE WITH A NIPPLE ON IT.
I CAN REMEMBER DRINKING BEER
THAT WAY, RIGHT OUT
OF A NIPPLE.
AND THEN I REMEMBER DRINKING IT
OUT OF A BABY'S BOTTLE.
AND OF COURSE YOU CRAWL AROUND
ON THE FLOOR, YOU GET DRUNK
AND THEY THINK THAT'S FUNNY.
SO THEY'D SIT THERE AND LAUGH.
BUT IT WASN'T FUNNY FOR ME.
LATER ON, I GUESS, MYSELF JUST
TURNED INTO AN ALCOHOLIC.
AND THE MURDER THAT HAPPENED
WHEN YOU WERE 55 YEARS OLD,
YOU SAID?
YEAH, THAT'S THE MURDER,
SECOND-DEGREE MURDER.
- HOW'D THAT END UP?
- DRINKING.
DRINKING AND RAISING HELL.
IT WASN'T PREMEDITATED
OR ANYTHING LIKE THAT?
- NO, IT JUST HAPPENED.
- YOU GET INTO A FIGHT?
I DRANK
A 40-POUNDER OF J.D.
I DRANK A 40-POUNDER OF RUM.
I DRANK BEER
- AND SHOTS OF LIQUOR
ALL DAY LONG.
- RIGHT.
SO THEN I GO TO THE HOTEL.
I'M IN AND OUT OF THE BARS.
SO THEN I SAYS,
"WELL, I GOT TO GET HIGHER.
I'M NOT DRUNK ENOUGH."
SO THEN I BOUGHT MYSELF
FIVE HITS OF THAT PURPLE
CRYSTAL ACID.
SO I TOOK A COUPLE.
THEY WEREN'T WORK--
I TOOK A COUPLE MORE.
I DON'T KNOW NOTHING
ABOUT DRUGS. I ENDED UP
TAKING FIVE OF THOSE.
I RODE MY BIKE 250 MILES,
DON'T REMEMBER EVEN RIDING IT.
I DON'T EVEN REMEMBER COMMITTING
THE MURDER, BUT IT LOOKED PRETTY
CONVINCING IN THE COURT.
SO I PLEADED GUILTY TO
SECOND-DEGREE MURDER, JUST TO
GET THE HELL OUT OF THERE.
BECAUSE I WAS LAYING
IN A BUCKET FOR 17 MONTHS.
THE HEALTH IS REALLY BAD.
LIKE I SAY,
IT'S DETERIORATING.
THE DOCTOR SAID
IT'S GOING DOWNHILL.
AND I CAN FEEL IT
GOING DOWNHILL.  EVERY YEAR
IT GETS WORSE.
I SHAKE MORE.
I AM A DIABETIC.
THEY PUT ME ON MEDICATION,
AND I KEEP GOING FROM THERE,
FROM DAY TO DAY.
IT'S ALL YOU CAN DO.
IF THEY LET ME OUT, FINE.
AND IF THEY DON'T,
THAT'S FINE TOO.
BECAUSE WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE?
I GOT 15 YEARS LEFT.
WHEN YOU GET TO THE POINT
IN YOUR LIFE THAT YOU
DON'T CARE ANYMORE,
WHAT HAPPENS?
THEN THAT'S IT.
YOU GOT TO HAVE
SOMETHING TO...
TO REACH OUT FOR.
HOPEFULLY, YOU MIGHT SEE
A LITTLE FLICKER OF LIGHT
AT THE END OF THE TUNNEL.
BUT SHE'S AWFULLY DIM.
YEP.
Dr. Andrew Harris:
ONE THING ABOUT PRISON IS IT
DOES GIVE PEOPLE TIME TO THINK.
OLDER MEN CHANGE
THEIR BEHAVIOR
AND WE DO SEE
A GREAT DEAL OF REMORSE,
A FEELING OF A LOST LIFE,
A FEELING OF HAVING
HAD ONE HAND TO PLAY
AND THEY'VE PLAYED IT
POORLY.
THEY'VE BECOME AWARE
THAT THEY NO LONGER
HAVE THE SKILLS
TO SURVIVE ON THEIR OWN,
OR EVEN IN A FAIRLY
SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT
IN THE COMMUNITY,
ESPECIALLY IF THEY'VE BEEN
LIFETIME CRIMINALS.
THEY LITERALLY DON'T KNOW HOW
TO MAKE A MEAL FOR THEMSELVES.
AND LONG-TERM
INSTITUTIONALIZATION
CAN DECREASE THOSE SKILLS,
BECAUSE THERE'S NO...
CHANCE IN MANY CASES
TO PRACTICE INDEPENDENT SKILLS.
SO THEY BECOME
INCREASINGLY AWARE
THAT THEY JUST COULDN'T
MAKE IT OUT THERE.
I WOULD THINK THAT THIS IS MADE
WORSE OVER THE LAST FEW YEARS
BECAUSE OF TECHNOLOGY
AND THE WAY LIFE HAS
SPEEDED UP.
WE HAVE MEN IN HERE
WHO LITERALLY HAVE NEVER
SEEN A BANK MACHINE.
IT'S A COMBINATION OF BEING
FRIGHTENED AND, OF COURSE,
IN THE MEDIA,
THE OUTSIDE WORLD
IS PORTRAYED
AS FAST-PACED,
TECHNOLOGICAL.
AND THESE MEN KNOW THAT
THEY JUST CAN'T PARTICIPATE
IN ANY MEANINGFUL WAY.
Levine:
I WANT TO CONFRONT PEOPLE
WITH THESE IMAGES.
I WANT TO SAY,
"WHAT ARE WE DOING?
WHY ARE THESE MEN IN PRISON?
WHAT DO WE DO ABOUT THIS?"
Wou:
THE ELDERLY POPULATION
IN PRISON
IS REALLY STARTING TO MUSHROOM,
BECAUSE OF THE BABY BOOMERS.
HOW DO WE DEAL WITH THAT?
HOW DO WE TAKE CARE OF THIS?
IS IT SIMPLY JUST OPENING
MORE GERIATRIC PRISONS
OR ARE THERE DIFFERENT WAYS
TO DEAL WITH THIS?
AND I KNOW THE CORRECTIONAL
FACILITIES IN CANADA
AND THE UNITED STATES
ARE ADDRESSING THIS,
AND IT'S ALL NEW TERRITORY.
Levine:
THEY'RE STRUCK, I THINK, BY
LIVES THEY NEVER KNEW EXISTED.
THEY'RE STRUCK
BY A PRISON SYSTEM
THEY NEVER KNEW EXISTED.
Billy Owen:
WE DO HAVE A HABITUAL OFFENDER
ACT IN ALABAMA.
IT HAS INCREASED OUR PRISON
POPULATION TREMENDOUSLY,
ESPECIALLY
AFTER THREE STRIKES.
IF THE CRIME RATE
REMAINS AS IT IS,
NATIONWIDE YOU'RE GOING
TO SEE AN OLDER AGED POPULATION
AS TIME GOES ON.
IT'S GONNA GROW.
THERE'S GONNA BE MORE
AND MORE OF A NEED
FOR AGED AND INFIRMED
FACILITIES TO HANDLE AGED
AND INFIRM INMATES.
Hamer:
20 YEARS FROM NOW,
CAN YOU IMAGINE?
WHEN THE POPULATION'S
GOING TO BE SIGNIFICANTLY
60, 65 AND OLDER,
THEY'RE GOING TO BE IN PRISON,
JUST LIKE THEY ARE
ON THE OUTSIDE.
Arbuckle:
WE DO HAVE A LARGE NUMBER
OF THOSE AGING OFFENDERS
WHO ARE SERVING
INDEFINITE SENTENCES,
AND THAT ESSENTIALLY MEANS THEY
MAY NEVER GET OUT OF JAIL.
AND THAT'S OUR PROBLEM, BECAUSE
WE ARE GOING TO HAVE TO DEAL
WITH THOSE INDIVIDUALS
AS THEY AGE UP
TO THE POINT OF DEATH.
SO WHAT WE'VE SEEN TO DATE
IS JUST THE TIP
OF THE ICEBERG.
Levine:
IN A SENSE, YOU WANT TO SHOCK
PEOPLE A BIT INTO SAYING
"HOLY SHIT,
WHAT'S GOING ON HERE?
WHAT ARE THESE OLD MEN
DOING IN PRISON AND WHY
ARE THEY STILL THERE?"
AND, SAME SENSE,
A LOT OF PEOPLE WILL WALK AWAY
FROM THAT SHOW AND SAY,
"THANK GOD THEY'RE IN PRISON.
LET THEM STAY THERE."
* LORD, I'M LOOKING
* LORD, FOR THE ROAD
* LEAD ME HOME
* I'VE BEEN SEARCHING
* NIGHT AND DAY
* LORD, BUT IT SEEMS LIKE
* I LOST MY WAY
* TELL ME WHERE
* LORD, IS THE ROAD
* I WANT TO GO HOME.